# Guaranteed insanity of content without intent

With the advent of human-level generative modelling, even barring future theoretical progress the consequences of profileration and honing of current tech are guaranteed to be - for want of a better word - insane. Human-level translation between popular languages is close to being essentially solved for practical purposes, but this is the sort of advance that slots neatly into our current systems. The changes that are now certain to transpire in the near future are the changes that we'd started to tacitly assume impossible. I think it's likely that further advances will make the future even weirder, but I want to quickly explore the minimal possible insanity levels of the next decade (as of September 2022).

### Three ingredients of media synthesis

Let's think about how a piece of long-form media, such as a book or a film, is created. Of course, this is equivalent to thinking about intelligent ways of compressing these media. I argue that there are three ingredients, corresponding to increasing scope.

- **Intuitive synthetic leaps** are well-defined local acts of synthesis from a higher-level description. Generating a shot of a character's face in an animated film from a brief written description, animating this face according to specified emotions, and writing the exact dialogue that expresses a given sentiment are all examples of intuitive synthetic leaps. They can be envisioned as functions that take in a style and a description and spit out a brief piece of media. The skills required for these functions are artistic intuition and "raw generative ability".
- At the level above, we have the **plot**- the specification of a chain of required synthetic leaps. This can be achieved at multiple levels of granularity, or even made hierarchical, but for an animated film I envision this as a shot-by-shot written summary. Whereas the acts of synthesis we are chaining require only savant-like artistic skill, producing a good plot requires an understanding of what makes a good story and powerful themes.
- The final ingredient is **coherence**- you can feed a plot line-by-line into a media synthesis black-box, but this won't spit out a great work of art unless it is globally as well as locally consistent. For a film, consistency requirements include unchanging character appearance and traits, stylistic coherence, and finally the intangible flourishes and connections that mark a honed product.

My essential argument is that the role of human genius in media creation will be relegated to the latter two, resulting in a drastic (but not necessarily negative) reconception of what makes an artist, as well as incredible proliferation of high-quality media. For example, it seems likely that far more great films will be produced in the next few decades than in the history of film so far.

### Automating intuitive synthetic leaps

What makes an artist great? We might point to particularly beautiful lines of Nabokov's prose, or impeccable Tarkovsky shots- examples of local acts of genius. But we could also gesture at Melville's ominous yet chaotic thematic unity. I argue that in the near future anyone will be able to conjure up a Kubrick shot or a couplet from a Shakespeare sonnet. The role of genius will be pruning and unifying these outputs into meaningful works of art.

And arguably this doesn't change the current situation that much. Currently an artist has to laboriously hone their own powerful stylistic intuition- but this is subconscious. A writer has an idea for a sentence, then runs their own black-box to conjure up the words they need. Granted, tuning this machinery required hours of deliberate effort, but the artist has no access to its internal functioning. The meditated thought of an artist is restricted to honing, unifying and guiding the fruits of their subconscious. Automated synthesis merely externalises this black-box, making it modular and replicable.

The plot and coherence requirements of the average Hollywood action film are very low. We will all be Hollywood directors within the next decade, and many of us will be significantly above average. Hence I expect an explosion in the number of high-quality action films available. (Of course, viewers will be able to specify exactly which actors or real-life people they wish to star in these films, vary soundtrack details and fight-scene locations etc). But far more exciting to me is that any of us will be able to write with access to the subconscious of Melville or Milton. Will we be skilful enough to use them?